Durban - A senior staff member at the University of KwaZulu-Natal who was leading the investigation into the sale of placement at its medical school has been arrested for defeating the ends of justice. Avril Sahadew, 43, a forensic audit specialist, was supposed to appear before the Pinetown Magistrate Court on Thursday but was unable to after testing positive for Covid-19, her lawyer told the court. Sahadew led the investigation known as Operation Clever on corruption at the university where placements at the Nelson R Mandela School of Medicine were being offered in exchange for bribes. The investigation has dragged on for four years without anyone being criminally charged or prosecuted. However, Sahadew was removed from the investigation in 2019, apparently, after a staff member laid a criminal charge against her. Police spokesperson, Colonel Thembeka Mbele confirmed that charges of crimen injuria, kidnapping and defeating the ends of justice were being investigated by Westville SAPS. It is alleged that Sahadew victimised one of the staff members and locked him in her office for probing a case “linked” to her. The university had provided Sahadew with a safe house and bodyguards while she was leading the investigation. It was alleged that Sahadew apparently “hijacked” an investigation from one of the investigators from the Risk Management department, which was allegedly going to expose her role in the sale of exam papers. It was further alleged that she used her bodyguards to victimise other colleagues, and confiscated money from two students who apparently wanted to buy exam papers. When one of the colleagues probed the matter, Sahadew allegedly “hijacked” the investigation and asked to be given all the details including the money. The colleague who was probing the matter was allegedly held hostage until he gave all the information and money to Sahadew. The staff member was then suspended for two years until the university instituted an investigation. The staff member was subsequently acquitted and returned to work. However, the university has not taken any action against Sahadew. Asked about the allegations against Sahadew, Norma Zondo, UKZN’S acting executive director said that the UKZN did not lay the charges against Sahadew and was not a party to the criminal proceedings. “As such, it would be improper and inappropriate to comment on the matter at this stage. Accordingly, any questions regarding this matter will not be dealt with. “The university was aware of the charges against Sahadew and would await a pronouncement from the court dealing with the matter,” she said. As to why Sahadew was not suspended, given the charges she faced, Zondo responded: “As with all criminally accused persons, they are innocent until proven guilty.” Earlier this month, the university was ordered by the Durban High Court to disclose the budget that had been spent on the Operation Clever after a businessman, Visham Panday, had approached the court. siboniso.mngadi@inl.co.za Sunday Tribune