Annie Dorasamy When Covid -19 patients in India get a second chance at life, it would be remembered that their compatriots in Durban, literally gave them a breath of fresh air. About 100 oxygenators are being prepared for delivery to the sub-continent next week to assist India in its fight against the second wave of the coronavirus that swept over several states. While the number of daily infections and the death toll have dropped since the country went into a hard lockdown earlier this month, their medical resources have been over stretched and unable to assist everyone battling the virus. That was why the Bochasanwasi Akshar Purushottam Swaminarayan (Baps) Charities, an international organisation, whose Durban branch is based at Manor Gardens, will be making the donation of the life-saving machines. Hari Patel, the co-ordinator of Baps Charities said they were confident that the machines would make a difference to people in India, especially those in rural areas who were unable to get to the hospitals. “We have branches in India that will make sure it goes into the right hands. “The machines have the maximum oxygen to sustain a patient and we are certain it would help save many lives because it is a good product and can be used over and over again,” he said. The oxygen machines were expected to be in Johannesburg today and ready for delivery later in the week. This wasn’t the first time Patel and his team at Baps have reached out to assist countries in distress. When the 2001 cyclone and earthquake rocked India, Baps built and furnished homes for those who were destitute. Then when Haiti was hit by an earthquake in 2010, they reached out again. Closer to home Baps made charitable contributions when fires broke out in Knysna and more recently when the coronavirus entered the country in March last year and the country went into lockdown level 5, the team risked their own lives by going into informal settlements like Cato Crest to deliver food hampers. “We believe that service to humanity is service to God,” said Patel. However, Patel was not alone in his vision to help those in suffering. Retired parliamentarian Omie Singh who is the president of KwaZulu-Natal International Business Association (Kiba) has partnered with Baps to assist India. His organisation, through fund-raising, and the generosity of big and small businesses have also contributed towards the purchase of the oxygenators. “India is our trading partner. “South Africa is not an island and our economy relies on other countries. “We would have done the same to assist any other trading partner. “It is simply the South African community assisting the Indian community at a time when they need all the help that they can get,” said Singh. He said the joint campaign between Baps and Kiba would make the logistics of getting the machines to India more streamlined. “There is no point in reinventing the wheel when it comes to humanitarian aid. “Baps is a highly credible organisation and when we found out what they were doing, we decided to partner with them,” he said. Singh has been busy on the north coast delivering personal protective equipment (PPEs) to front-line workers at various state institutions such as hospitals, courts, police stations and schools. Patel has also commended the South African Hindu Maha Sabha (SAHMS) for their contributions to the campaign as well as their role in donating almost R1.1 million towards the India Covid Relief Fund. For more information on Baps Charity drive email: bapscharities.sa.gmail.com or haripatel57@yahoo.co.uk 