Durban - Passengers going to work in a taxi from the Mzingazi location to the suburb of Meerensee in Richards Bay on Monday morning were startled by the sound of gunshots. They had no idea who was shooting and why traffic had suddenly come to a halt. “It all happened so quickly and I can’t even remember the number of shots. We didn’t understand what was happening,” said one of the passengers, who did not want to be named. It was only confirmed moments later that Nico Swart, the general manager of Richards Bay Minerals (RBM), was killed in an ambush. Swart, 47, was attacked allegedly by three men while on his way to work at the corner of Dune and Kolstert roads. Twenty high-calibre bullets were fired into his car. While he lay dying on the side of the road, the suspects fled the scene on foot. Meerensee Community Policing forum (CPF) members were among the first on the scene. They alerted the police and a local pastor to attend to the family. Henk van Niekerk, Meerensee CPF vice-chairperson, said it was not the first time that members were the first on the scene of a fatal crime. However, Van Niekerk said that each time felt as if the “wind had been knocked out of him” by the absolute senselessness and brutal killing of a fellow human. He said Swart’s family was heartbroken but that good would prevail. Van Niekerk said the crime was not only against an individual or company, but against the community and those who respected law and order. “We will not concede to fear and helplessness but stand strong in faith and hope. We believe that justice will be served to those that live with total disregard and disrespect for others and the place we call home,” he said. He described Swart as an unimposing family man who was well respected. He said Swart had been involved with the Dutch Reformed Church and that when in public he was always at his wife’s side. Between 2011 and 2012, Swart had been a volunteer when the Meerensee CPF was established, but had to step down in 2013 due to his work commitments. Suspicion was rife that the murder was linked to ongoing local conflicts within communities surrounding RBM. This had resulted in the company shutting down operations in 2019. KZN MEC for Transport, Community Safety and Liaison, Peggy Nkonyeni said the provincial government had to intervene to resolve the escalating violence. “It is alleged that the community issues stem from two possible issues, one being the community wanting the chieftaincy in the Kwambonambi area to be finalised following the installation of an administrator. The other was allegations around the land damage compensation process from some members of the community.” Werner Duvenhage, managing director at RBM, would not be drawn into a possible motive, saying it would be inappropriate to speculate. “Of course, any incident which causes harm to our people is a cause for concern and we will co-operate with the investigation in any way we can to help the authorities bring the perpetrators to book. RBM continues to engage various stakeholders at the highest levels within the province to permanently address issues that are threatening the security of our people, our operations and our communities.” Provincial police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said Swart succumbed to his injuries on the scene. “He was shot at around 6.45am while driving in his car on his way to work. The motive is unknown and the matter is still under investigation.” Swart was laid to rest on Friday. He is survived by his wife and two children. lethu.nxumalo@inl.co.za Sunday Tribune